- And history will show,
that your contribution to physical culture
by coming up with the
X3 bar is well deserved,
so before we start telling people about
X3 bar and I'm gonna tell
everybody something right now,
you have to be open minded
when we start talking
about this because you're gonna think
you know what this is and you don't.
How did you come up with this?
What was the deal behind it?
- So my background is in
bone density research.
I invented a device that
puts axial compression,
so this is the axis of bone,
the length of the bone,
and we put force through
that bone in positions
where we would naturally
absorb high impact forces
so you trip and fall,
you protect yourself.
The big issue here.
If I look at what people can do
with full range of motion,
which means you're limited by
your weaker range of motion
hence why we call it the weaker range.
So studies on bench press, sticking point,
this is all part of the same,
the same discussion.
So when we look at that
and then we look at what
a human is capable of,
at extension so like
when I'm on a bench press
when my arm is out here,
what am I capable of
with a 120 degree angle of
inclusion upper low arm,
is incredible.
It's actually seven times greater than
what I'm capable of in a
weaker range of motion.
So I'm looking at this and I'm thinking,
we're missing out.
We are leaving the games at the gym,
we're not getting it.
- But in.
- Or anything like that I lifted,
never really got much results out of it,
I was pretty average guy,
and then I started reading
about west side barbell
and how you would add bands and chains
to some of their lifts and
then there was a great study
done by Professor Anderson
with Cornell Athletes
and they divide the athletes
in the two different groups.
One group did,
they used less resistance
than they would normally use
and then added bands,
so let's say they had X weight here,
and then add extension let's say,
1.2x or 1.3x.
So hyper loading the strong range
and offloading the weak range,
they grew three times
the amount of muscle,
I should say strength,
I mean muscle is strength all together,
but three times the amount of strength
in a given period of time
compared to the control group
who's is just doing their regular training
tested pre to post.
So ultimately,
I look at both groups
who are lifting weights.
The difference is,
one group added bands,
so and I take that and
this is another thing,
'cause people will look
at the science of X3
and go, well, it's not this,
and they pull one
sentence out of one study
and they don't know how to
read scientific documentation
because there's a reason I
have multiple references,
it's because I'm pulling
things from different places,
so then when you look at
my research out of London
and you take the two
and you cross observe,
forget the weight,
we need more variance.
- Yes.
- It's actually.
I still want to stay strong,
but we alwyays talk about, oh,
I want to train smarter,
you wanna train smarter,
it's called the X3 bar.
Because you can be as strong as you want
but in the weak places
where you normally injure yourself,
it's dynamic for you.
- Yeah, the weight drops
off where you're at risk.
- It's so beautiful.
- And it's so, so very quickly,
so it comes with the 12 week program,
I think on week three,
I don't remember, I filmed
it a couple of weeks ago,
well more than 12 weeks ago.
So the,
we get into what's called
diminishing range of fatigue,
so you do however many reps you do,
and then you go to fatigue
in the strong range,
and then you ratchet back
and do reps in the mid range,
'cause you can't get to
the strong range anymore,
'cause it's a very high weight.
- Oh interesting.
- Yeah,
and then you--
- So you actually take it,
you actually take the muscle
to several levels of failure.
- In one set.
- In one set, yeah.
- So you're not letting
a massive amount of blood
in to recover 'cause
the problem with pausing
if you're doing the board press,
you pause and your body
immediately starts to recover
from that.
- Right.
- So it's really not as
intense an experience
as this is.
This is absolute fatigue
of the muscle in all ranges
of motion simultaneously.
- I love it, I love it.
- Or in degrading ranges of motion
called diminishing range.
And the effects,
you basically need one set per body part.
That's what I did for a year
when I prototyped it,
'cause even though I looked at the data,
I thought this just really
seems too good to be true.
I experimented with once
I got the prototype built,
oh I should say that at
first I was just gonna
write a book about ultra
heavy band training
but go find somebody
that'll make you bands
that will hold, two, three,
400, 500 pounds and train with the bands,
the problem is a band,
wants to be,
it wants to conform, right.
So it stretches and it doesn't just,
it doesn't form a shape of a bar,
and so your wrists get twisted.
And your ankles, if you're dead lifting
with a 400 pound band,
and stretch, your ankles
are bending inwards--
- Oh hell yeah.
- And your ankle does
not like lateral force.
- Right.
- So what happens is you
have neural inhibition
which instantly starts
shutting muscle off.
So when you're uncomfortable
when you're lifting something
you're getting a crummy workout
or not one at all because muscles
are beginning to shut off.
And so, within two days of experimenting
with these heavy bands,
I'm this is not gonna work.
I gotta develop an Olympic bar which,
so I can grab here and grab here
but I'm gonna do an overhead press
where I can, it can rotate so,
so the X3 is, it's an Olympic bar,
full steel Olympic bar,
I coated it in rubber,
a lot of people don't understand
that the whole thing is
actually tested the same spec,
that a rogue, an Olympic bars which
has some significant cost behind it
which people look at it and go
why is it so expensive.
It's an orbit bar,
and then the bands are not like
the goofy little rehab bands
that you can find at Walmart,
these are hundreds of pounds at extension
to deliver, not only are
you getting more force,
but you're getting more force
at more repetitions, so--
- And and and and at appropriate points
in the muscle contraction
and this is the
interesting thing about it.